Got it! I will create concise overview documents covering:
PRD (Product Requirements Document) outlining the features and goals.
App Flow Doc detailing system interactions and user workflows.
Tech Stack Doc specifying technologies used for backend, frontend, AI models, and testing.
Frontend Guidelines to ensure a structured UI approach.
Backend Structure defining how data is handled and services interact.
These will integrate your Ollama models (gemma3:27b for NLP tasks like summarization, sentiment analysis, and error detection) and leverage pytest/unittest for automated testing, with LLM-assisted debugging.
I will also include system architecture diagrams (flowcharts/UML) for better visualization and ensure flexibility in the tech stack while prioritizing ease of use and performance.
I'll get back to you soon with the completed documents!
Product Requirements Document (PRD)
Core Features
Real-time Activity Tracking: The bot monitors multiple Discord servers (guilds) in real time, capturing user messages and activities as they happen (GitHub - ajyuan/Monitori: A Discord sentiment analysis bot that encourages positivity and rewards server members for saying nice things :). Built using Node.js and Discord.js). It caches or stores messages for analysis to ensure no data is missed during busy conversations.
Daily Summarization: Each day, the system compiles a concise summary of the day’s conversations. This summary condenses the key points and discussions from potentially thousands of messages into a digestible format (Summarization). The summarization is abstractive – generating new summary text that captures important information rather than just extracting lines.
Sentiment Analysis: All tracked messages are analyzed for sentiment to gauge the community’s mood (What Is Sentiment Analysis? | IBM). The bot determines whether messages (and overall daily discussions) are positive, negative, or neutral, helping server admins understand user sentiment trends. Positive interactions can be highlighted, while negative spikes might flag issues.
Dynamic Channel Management: Admins can configure which channels to track or ignore. The bot automatically adapts if new channels are created or old ones are deleted, ensuring relevant channels are always monitored without manual intervention. (For example, an admin might mark an off-topic channel to be excluded from summaries.)
Report Delivery: Daily summaries and sentiment reports are delivered automatically (e.g. posted in a designated #daily-summary channel or via direct message to admins) at a scheduled time. The report includes the text summary of discussions, sentiment overview (e.g. “overall mood was 80% positive today”), and key activity metrics (like top contributors).
Multi-Server Support: A single bot instance can serve multiple Discord servers concurrently. Data and reports are isolated per server – e.g. each server gets its own summary and sentiment stats. The bot identifies servers by their unique IDs (guild IDs) so that messages and reports don’t mix between communities.
Functional Requirements
Message Monitoring: The system must listen to all messages in specified text channels via Discord’s API. Every message event should trigger the bot to log the message content, author, timestamp, and channel info into a database for later analysis (GitHub - ajyuan/Monitori: A Discord sentiment analysis bot that encourages positivity and rewards server members for saying nice things :). Built using Node.js and Discord.js). This logging should happen asynchronously to not delay Discord operations.
Summarization Generation: The system must generate a daily summary of messages for each server. At a preset time (e.g. every night at midnight server time or a configurable time), the bot will retrieve that day’s collected messages and produce a summary using an AI model. The summary should be representative of the day’s discussions (covering major topics and any important decisions or highlights).
Sentiment Calculation: The bot must perform sentiment analysis on user messages. This can be per message (assigning a sentiment score or label to each message) and/or aggregated per user or per day. The daily report should include an overall sentiment rating for the day (e.g. “mostly positive sentiment” with perhaps a simple score) (What Is Sentiment Analysis? | IBM). If possible, identify the most positive or negative messages/users as examples (to encourage positive engagement).
Command Interface: The bot should provide commands or interactions for configuration and on-demand reports. For example, a server admin might use a slash command like /setsummary #announcements to set the channel for daily summaries, or /summary now to manually trigger a summary. Regular users might use /myactivity to get their own stats or sentiment (if such feature is allowed by admins).
Data Management: The system must maintain a persistent store of collected data (messages, summaries, user stats). It should handle data creation and updates: e.g. adding a new guild to the database when the bot is invited (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium), recording new channels, updating user activity counts, etc. There should also be a way to purge or archive old data to manage database size over time (e.g. keep only last 30 days of messages for summarization).
Error Detection & Notification: (Advanced) The system could utilize the integrated AI to detect anomalies or errors in conversations or in the bot’s operation. For example, if an error stack trace is posted in a developer channel, the bot might recognize it and attempt an AI-generated explanation. Internally, if the bot encounters runtime errors, it should log them and possibly use the AI to suggest causes (Using LLMs to Analyze and Extract Insights from Device Logs [P] : r/MachineLearning), notifying developers/admins without crashing.
Report Delivery & Format: The daily summary report must be delivered in an easily readable format on Discord. This includes a clear text summary and maybe a brief sentiment summary. The bot should use embedded messages or code blocks if necessary for formatting. If a web dashboard is available, the report should also be accessible there (the bot might post a link or visual summary).
Performance and Responsiveness: The bot’s tracking and analysis tasks must not noticeably degrade the user experience in Discord. Message logging and analysis should be efficient (using asynchronous calls and possibly batch processing) so that the bot can handle high message volumes. Summarization (which is more compute-intensive) can be done on a schedule when slight delays are acceptable, but the bot should respond to commands or queries from users within a few seconds.
Non-Functional Requirements
Reliability: The bot should run 24/7 without manual intervention. It must handle Discord disconnects gracefully (auto-reconnecting using discord.py’s built-in handlers) and recover from failures. Daily summary tasks should run even if the bot has restarted (e.g. use persistent scheduling or catch-up if a downtime occurred at the scheduled time).
Scalability: The system should scale to dozens of servers and high message volumes. Using an efficient database and possibly processing messages in bulk will ensure it can handle growth (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium). If needed in the future, the architecture could be extended to distribute workload (for example, multiple bot processes or offloading heavy NLP tasks to a separate service).
Maintainability: The codebase should be clear and modular, suitable for junior developers to understand and extend. Following common Python and discord.py conventions (like using cogs for organization) is encouraged. Comprehensive documentation (as we are creating) and comments in code will make maintenance easier. The design should allow new features (like additional analytics) to be added without major refactor.
Security & Privacy: User messages are sensitive data. The system must ensure that stored data is secured – if using SQLite/PostgreSQL, protect the database file or credentials. Do not expose raw messages to any unauthorized user or in the web UI without permission. Additionally, abide by Discord’s privacy guidelines: e.g. if users delete messages, the bot should respect that in summaries (perhaps exclude or update them). The AI models running locally (Gemma3 via Ollama) ensure no data leaves the server for external processing, enhancing privacy.
Accuracy of AI Outputs: The system should aim for accurate summaries and sentiment classification. While occasional AI errors are expected, the prompts and models chosen should be tuned for the Discord conversational domain to improve relevance. There should be a way for admins to give feedback or correct a summary if it’s significantly off (even if it’s just by reporting it to developers for now).
Usability: For the end-users (community admins and members), interacting with the bot should be intuitive. Defaults should make sense (e.g. by default, summarize all channels except perhaps very low-activity ones; default summary time is 00:00). Documentation or a help command (/help) should briefly explain the bot’s commands and features. The tone of summary messages should be neutral and informative, as it represents an AI-generated recap of their community.
Expected User Interactions
Onboarding: A server admin adds (invites) the bot to their server. Upon joining, the bot sends a welcome message in a default channel (or DM to the admin) explaining its functionality and how to configure it. It will automatically start tracking public text channels unless configured otherwise.
Configuration: The admin can configure the bot via Discord commands (e.g. selecting which channels to include or exclude, setting the summary delivery channel, or changing the daily summary time). This could also be done via a web dashboard if available (e.g. toggling channels on a settings page).
Daily Summary Post: Every day at the scheduled time, the bot posts the summary in the designated channel. For example: “Daily Summary (Mar 20, 2025): Today 150 messages were sent. Topics: The community discussed the new project release and shared some memes. Sentiment: Overall positive 😊 – most members were excited about the updates. @Alice was the top contributor with 25 messages.” The summary might @mention key contributors or use emojis for sentiment to make it engaging.
On-Demand Commands: A user or admin might trigger certain interactions. For instance, an admin could type /summary week to get a summary of the past week’s discussions, or a user might type /mystats to receive a brief personal activity report (e.g. how many messages they sent and their average sentiment). The bot should respond in-channel or via DM as appropriate, with a short delay if it needs to compute something (showing a “typing…” indicator if possible while generating a reply).
Web Dashboard (optional): If a web front-end is provided, admins would log in (probably via Discord OAuth2 to verify their identity and server ownership). They would see a dashboard listing their servers and could click one to view detailed analytics: the latest summary, graphs of sentiment over time, user activity charts, etc. They might also adjust settings on this dashboard. This complements the in-Discord experience by providing a rich UI for historical data and configuration.
Error and Help Interaction: If the bot encounters an error (e.g. failing to generate a summary), it should handle it quietly and inform the admin. For example, “(Error: Summary generation failed today. Please check the logs or try again.)”. Users can request help with /help to get a list of commands and a short description of each. The bot should be non-intrusive – it doesn’t chat on its own except to provide the requested summaries or info, so it behaves mostly as a background service.
App Flow Document
High-Level Workflow
The Discord bot operates through an event-driven flow for real-time tracking and a scheduled flow for daily summaries. The following describes how data moves through the system from Discord to the final output:
Message Event Handling: Whenever a user sends a message in a tracked channel, Discord’s API triggers an event which the bot (using discord.py) receives. The bot’s event listener captures the message content and metadata (server, channel, author, timestamp). It immediately stores this information in the database for persistence and later analysis. This happens asynchronously to not slow down Discord interactions. Optionally, the bot can do a quick sentiment evaluation on the message right away and tag it (e.g. store a sentiment score along with the message).
Data Storage: As messages flow in, the database grows a log of the day’s conversation. The system might also update running counters (like message count per user, or track active hours) in memory or in the database. This continuous logging builds the dataset that will be summarized. If the bot is tracking multiple servers, it separates data by server ID in the database, ensuring isolation of each server’s data.
Scheduled Summary Trigger: A scheduler (either an internal loop or external trigger) wakes up at the end of each day (or a configured time (python - Discord.py Bot run function at specific time every day - Stack Overflow)】. For each server, it initiates the summary generation process. In discord.py, this can be implemented with tasks.loop that runs at a specific time every da (python - Discord.py Bot run function at specific time every day - Stack Overflow)】. The bot prepares the input for summarization by retrieving all messages (or a relevant subset) from the database for that server for that day. If there are too many messages, it might cap the number or focus on the most important ones (this can be refined using heuristics or letting the LLM handle a large context since Gemma3 can take 128K tokens).
Summarization and Analysis: The collected text is fed into the NLP pipeline. The system uses an AI model (Gemma3 via Ollama, or a Hugging Face model) to generate a coherent summary of the day’s discussion. Alongside, it computes sentiment trends – e.g. counts of positive vs negative messages, identification of any notable emotional shifts during the day. The summarization model might be prompted not only to summarize but also to note the general tone (this can be part of the prompt: “Summarize the chat and note if the tone was positive or negative.”). The result is a block of text for the summary, and some numeric sentiment metrics.
Report Composition: The bot then composes the daily report. This includes the summary text from the AI, plus any additional stats (like sentiment or top contributors). For example, it might create a formatted message with sections: Summary, Sentiment, Stats. If the server has multiple channels of interest, the report might break out mini-summaries per channel or simply mention the channel names in the combined summary (depending on design chosen in PRD).
Report Delivery: Finally, the bot delivers the report. Using Discord’s API (through discord.py), it sends the summary message to the predetermined channel (or to the admins). This could be done by constructing a Discord embed (for a nicer presentation) or just plain text. The message posting is also an event – meaning the bot will also capture its own message in the logging (which can be ignored). After posting, the daily cycle concludes. The bot then waits for the next day’s messages and repeats the process. (image)】 Workflow: The flowchart below illustrates the bot’s end-to-end process for message tracking and daily summary generation. First, the bot initializes and begins listening to events. Each incoming message is logged to the database in real time, and a sentiment analysis step labels the message as positive/neutral/negative. A decision point checks if it’s time for the daily summary – if not, the bot simply continues to collect messages. At the scheduled end-of-day, the bot gathers all stored messages from that day and invokes the LLM (Gemma3 via Ollama) to generate a summary. The summary report is then sent to Discord (and optionally saved), after which the bot goes back to idle state waiting for new messages.

Dynamic Tracking Logic
Joining New Servers: When the bot is invited to a new server, the Discord API triggers a “guild join” event. The bot should handle this by initializing data structures for that server (e.g. creating a new entry in the Guilds table of the database (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)】. It may send a welcome/setup message as noted in the PRD. From that point, it will start tracking default channels. Similarly, if the bot is removed from a server, it should archive or remove that server’s data after a grace period.
Channel Configuration: The bot keeps a list of channels to monitor for each server (by default, perhaps all text channels except certain categories like “announcements” if not desired). Admin commands can update this list. Internally, the bot might maintain an in-memory set of channel IDs per guild that it checks against for each message event. For example, on each message event, the handler might do: if message.channel.id in tracked_channels[guild_id]: log_message(). This dynamic check ensures we only store messages from relevant channels. If an admin adds or removes channels, the set is updated (and possibly persisted to the database).
Role of AI in Flow: The AI models are used in two places in the flow: summarization and sentiment analysis (and possibly error explanation). For summarization, the bot either calls the local Ollama API with Gemma3 or uses a transformers pipeline. This call is typically the most time-consuming step and might be done outside the main event loop (for instance, in a background thread or as an await on an async HTTP call to Ollama). For sentiment, a lightweight model (like a Hugging Face sentiment classifier) could be used on each message as it comes, which is fast (few hundred milliseconds) – or sentiment could be derived in bulk at day end by analyzing all messages together. We might choose to do per-message sentiment scoring on the fly and store those scores, as that provides instant feedback if needed (and could enable features like a positivity leaderboard updated in real-time).
Concurrency and Rate Limits: The flow accounts for Discord rate limits by spacing out actions. Message logging is usually fine (it’s just internal), but sending messages (like the summary) is rate-limited by Discord if done too frequently. Since summaries are at most once a day per server, that’s not an issue. However, if an admin requests a manual summary, the bot should ensure that generating and sending it doesn’t conflict with any ongoing scheduled summary task. The use of asyncio locks or state flags can prevent overlapping runs.
Message Flow Details
To further clarify the message flow, here’s a step-by-step sequence for a single message and the subsequent daily summary:
User sends a message in a tracked Discord channel. (Discord server forwards this to our bot via the Discord Gateway API.)
Bot receives the message event through the discord.py library. This includes message content and metadata.
Bot logs the message: It creates a record in the database (e.g. in a Messages table with fields: message_id, user, channel, content, timestamp). This ensures the message is saved for analysis even if edited or deleted later.
Sentiment analysis (optional real-time): The bot calls a sentiment analyzer function on the message text. For example, using a pretrained model to get a sentiment score. It then updates the database record (or a separate table) with that sentiment value (e.g. +0.8 for positive, -0.6 for negative). This could also be used to increment a running sentiment sum for the user or channel.
Continue tracking: The bot then goes back to waiting for the next event. Steps 1-4 repeat for all messages throughout the day. The system might also handle other events (joins, etc.) but those are outside this core flow.
Scheduled time arrives (say 00:00): The summary task triggers. The bot queries the database for all messages from that server in the last 24 hours (since the last summary timestamp). It may filter or sort them as needed (e.g. by time).
Generate summary: The bot prepares a prompt for the LLM summarizer. For instance: “Summarize the following Discord chat messages between users in a community. Focus on main topics and outcomes.\n[Here it inserts the text of messages, possibly truncated or batched]\nSummary:”. It then invokes Gemma3 (27B model) via Ollama with this prompt. The model processes the input and returns a summary text. (If the text is extremely long, the bot may chunk the conversation and generate partial summaries, then combine them – this is a potential enhancement for very busy servers.)
Analyze sentiment summary: The bot also computes sentiment stats for the day, if not already computed. Since each message might already have a sentiment score from earlier, it can just aggregate (e.g. calculate average sentiment score, or count of positive vs negative messages). Alternatively, the bot could also prompt the LLM: “Additionally, assess the overall tone of the conversation (very positive, somewhat neutral, etc.)” and parse the result.
Compose report message: The bot formats the summary text and stats into a message. It might use Markdown for formatting (e.g. bold titles, bullet points for different topics if the summary is naturally splittable). It could include a small ASCII chart or simple counts for sentiment (e.g. “👍 120 positive, 😐 30 neutral, 👎 10 negative messages”).
Send summary to Discord: The bot uses channel.send() via discord.py to post the composed summary message to the designated channel. This completes the daily cycle for that server. The bot records that the summary for that date was sent (maybe updating a Summaries table with a timestamp and summary content). This is useful for the web dashboard or if an admin wants to recall a past summary.
Post-cycle cleanup: The bot might optionally purge or archive the day’s messages from memory (if it kept any). Since they’re in the database, they persist. It could also reset any counters and get ready for the next day. The scheduler will sleep until the next trigger.
Through this flow, the system provides continuous monitoring and periodic insight, effectively acting as an autonomous community manager that keeps an eye on conversations and reports the highlights and health of the community daily.
Tech Stack Document
Overview of Technologies
The system is built with a modern Python-based stack, integrating Discord APIs, a web framework, databases, and AI/NLP libraries to achieve its functionality. Below is a list of the key technologies and the rationale for each:
Python 3.x: The core language for the bot. Python was chosen due to its simplicity and the availability of the excellent discord.py lib (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)L10】. Python’s async support fits well with Discord’s event-driven model and allows integration of AI libraries (like Hugging Face Transformers) easily. The large ecosystem (for HTTP, DB access, scheduling, etc.) speeds up development for a junior developer.
discord.py library: A Python wrapper for Discord’s API that provides convenient classes for bots and ev (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)L10】. This abstracts away low-level HTTP/WebSocket handling and lets us write event handlers for messages, reactions, etc. The choice of discord.py is standard for Python Discord bots – it’s well-documented and widely used, which means plenty of community support.
FastAPI: A lightweight Python web framework used to build a RESTful API for the system’s backend. FastAPI is chosen for its high performance (built on ASGI/UVicorn) and intuitive syntax for defining endpoints. It allows us to expose bot data (summaries, stats) to a web dashboard or external services. FastAPI also uses Python’s asyncio, so it can run in the same event loop as discord.py (advanced) or as a separate process. Its automatic documentation (Swagger UI) is a bonus for testing APIs.
SQLite / PostgreSQL database: For data persistence, the system uses a SQL database. SQLite is the default choice for simplicity – it’s file-based and requires no separate server, good for initial development or small deploym (GitHub - ajyuan/Monitori: A Discord sentiment analysis bot that encourages positivity and rewards server members for saying nice things :). Built using Node.js and Discord.js)271】. The bot can simply read/write to a local .db file. For production or if concurrency becomes an issue, PostgreSQL is recommended as a robust, scalable relational DB. Using SQL ensures we can run complex queries (e.g. filtering messages by date, aggregating sentiment) easily with indices for performance. We also considered that many Discord bots successfully use SQL databases to store their data (guild configs, logs, etc.), and ORMs like SQLAlchemy/SQLModel make this ea (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)231】.
SQLModel (SQLAlchemy) [Optional]: A Python ORM (Object-Relational Mapper) that can be used to interact with the database in an object-oriented (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)231】. This wasn’t explicitly listed, but based on best practices, using an ORM can help a junior dev avoid raw SQL and use Python classes instead (e.g., a Message class that maps to a messages table). SQLModel in particular is built on SQLAlchemy and is designed to be simple to use with Pydantic models. This choice isn’t mandatory – direct SQL or a simpler lightweight ORM could also be used – but it greatly improves maintainability and readability of database interactions.
Hugging Face Transformers: A library providing state-of-the-art NLP models and pipelines. This is used for tasks like summarization and sentiment analysis. For summarization, models like BART or T5 can be employed via a one-line pipeline call (pipeline("summarization")) which returns a summary for given (Summarization)188】. For sentiment, a model like distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english can classify text as positive/negative. The Hugging Face ecosystem was chosen because it offers many pre-trained models and an easy API to use them, which accelerates development of NLP features. Instead of training our own models, we leverage these pre-trained ones (or our LLM) to get high-quality results. Hugging Face Pipelines offer a simple high-level interface without needing to manage tokenization or model details manu (How to Build A Text Summarizer Using Huggingface Transformers)-L3】.
Ollama + Gemma3:27B (LLM): Ollama is a toolkit for running large language models locally. The user’s setup includes the gemma3:27b model, which is a 27-billion-parameter model capable of advanced NLP tasks like summarization, reasoning, and sentiment reaso (gemma3:27b) (gemma3:27b)L52】. We integrate this model to power the heavy AI tasks: it can produce more coherent and context-aware summaries of the Discord chats than smaller models, and can even be used to interpret errors or complex language in chats. The choice to use a local LLM is motivated by privacy (no data leaves the host), cost (no ongoing API fees), and capability (Gemma3 is powerful enough to handle very large context windows, up to 128K to (gemma3:27b)L55】, which is beneficial for summarizing an entire day’s chat). The bot will interface with Ollama either via an HTTP API (if Ollama provides one) or via a command-line call. For example, an API call might send the prompt and receive the model’s response. The Gemma3 model specifically excels at summarization and question-answering, making it suitable for generating daily summaries and answering “why did this error happen?” kinds of prompts.
Pytest (and Unittest): For testing the bot’s code, we use pytest as the primary framework, with possible use of Python’s built-in unittest for certain cases. Pytest is chosen due to its simple assertion syntax and powerful fixtures, which help in setting up test scenarios (like populating a temp database with messages, or simulating a Discord event). This ensures our features (tracking, summarization, etc.) work as expected and regressions are caught early. Additionally, having tests is part of making the project junior-friendly, as it provides examples of usage and ensures confidence when modifying code.
Docker [Optional]: While not explicitly listed, using Docker in deployment is common (as hinted by similar projects deploying to AWS with Do (Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium)L72】). Dockerizing the bot and its environment (including the model) could simplify running the system on servers. This isn’t required, but it’s something considered in technology choices (ensuring all components can run in containers).
React & Tailwind CSS (Frontend): On the frontend side, React is suggested for building a dashboard. React allows modular, component-based development – ideal for a junior dev to break the UI into pieces (like ServerList, SummaryCard, SentimentChart components). Tailwind CSS is recommended to quickly style these components with utility classes, avoiding the need to write lots of custom CSS. The combo of React+Tailwind is popular and has a wealth of examples and templates, which reduces the effort of designing a UI from scratch. It also integrates well with REST APIs (using fetch/axios to call FastAPI backend). We pick these for their balance of ease-of-use and scalability (the UI can grow in complexity as needed, and Tailwind ensures consistency in design).
Charting Library [Optional]: To display sentiment trends or other stats on the dashboard, a chart library like Chart.js or Recharts can be used. This makes it easy to visualize data (e.g., a line chart of daily sentiment score over a month, or a bar chart of top active users). It’s not mandatory but improves the value of the frontend.
Logging & Monitoring Tools: Python’s logging module is used to track the bot’s activity and errors. For more advanced monitoring, one could integrate Sentry (for error tracking) or Prometheus/Grafana (for metrics), but those are optional and can be added once the base system is stable.
Rationale and Integration
Each component of the tech stack was chosen with integration in mind. Discord.py and FastAPI can both run on asyncio, which means in theory they could be combined. In practice, we might run them in separate threads or processes to keep things simple (one process for the bot, one for the API), communicating through the database. The database serves as a central integration point – the bot writes data to it, the FastAPI reads from it to serve the dashboard. The AI components (Hugging Face models or Ollama LLM) are called from the Python backend as needed. Since Gemma3 is a large model, running it on the same machine means we need sufficient GPU/CPU resources; we justify this by the requirement for powerful summarization. If resources are limited, we can switch to smaller Hugging Face models as a fallback (the system is flexible to use either the local LLM or an alternative model based on configuration).
Another consideration was scalability: using standard protocols (HTTP for API, database for storage) means we can distribute components later (e.g., run multiple bot processes if Discord sharding is needed, or move the database to a cloud service). The current stack is fully open-source and free to use (no licensing issues), which is good for a community tool.
In summary, the technology choices prioritize developer approachability (Python, React), powerful capabilities (transformers and LLMs for AI), and solid infrastructure for data (SQL DB, FastAPI). This ensures the system can be implemented relatively quickly but also extended and maintained over time.
Frontend Guidelines
(If a web dashboard is included as part of the system, the following guidelines apply to ensure a clean, user-friendly interface for viewing the bot’s insights.)
UI Structure and Design
Dashboard Layout: Organize the dashboard by server. Upon logging in, the user (admin) sees a list of Discord servers they have connected with the bot (fetched via the backend). Selecting a server brings up that server’s “insights page.” This page should display the latest daily summary at a glance, along with key statistics. A clean two-column layout could work: left side for textual summaries/updates, right side for charts or metrics.
Daily Summary View: Present the summary in a card or panel with a date header. The summary text (as generated by the AI) can be shown in a scrollable area if long, but ideally it should be concise enough to fit in one panel. Include sub-sections if available, for example: Top Topics, Highlights, etc., based on the summary content. Use simple formatting (paragraphs, bullet points) to make it skimmable.
Sentiment Visualization: Use intuitive visuals to show sentiment analysis results. For instance, a small colored bar or pie chart can indicate the proportion of positive/neutral/negative messages for the day. A line chart over time (last 7 days or 30 days) can show sentiment trend (e.g., an upward trend means the server is getting more positive). Color-code sentiments (green for positive, grey for neutral, red for negative) to leverage intuitive understan (What Is Sentiment Analysis? | IBM)L17】.
User Activity Stats: If the bot provides stats like “top contributors” or message counts, display these in a ranked list. E.g., “🏆 Most Active Users: 1. Alice (25 messages), 2. Bob (18 messages), 3. …”. This could be a sidebar element. It encourages engagement by showing friendly competition.
Responsive Design: Ensure the UI is responsive, so that it could be viewed on different devices. Tailwind CSS makes it easy to apply responsive utility classes. The key views (summary text and charts) should reflow nicely on narrower screens (perhaps stacking vertically).
Theming and Aesthetics: Use a simple, modern theme – since Tailwind is in use, stick to a neutral color palette with one accent color (maybe Discord blurple or a custom brand color for the bot) for highlights. Keep the background light or dark depending on preference, but maintain good contrast for readability. Icons can be used sparingly next to headings (for example, a sentiment icon 😊😐😞 next to “Sentiment” section).
Framework and Implementation Notes
React Components: Break down the UI into reusable components:
ServerList component for the sidebar listing servers.
SummaryCard component to display the summary text for a given day.
SentimentChart component for the sentiment pie/line chart.
StatsTable for any tabular stats (user message counts, etc.).
SettingsModal if allowing any configuration from the frontend.
Using components makes the code organized and easier for a junior developer to manage piece by piece.
State Management: For a simple dashboard, React’s built-in state and Context might suffice (no need for complex state libraries unless the app grows). For example, keep the selected server and date in a context or parent component state, and pass data to child components as props.
Fetching Data: Interact with the backend FastAPI through REST endpoints. Upon selecting a server, the app might call an API like GET /api/servers/{id}/summary/latest to get the latest summary and associated data. Use fetch or Axios in useEffect hooks to retrieve this data when the component mounts or when the selected server/date changes. Make sure to handle loading states (show a spinner or “Loading…” text while data is being fetched) and error states (if API call fails, show an error message in the UI).
Authentication: Likely the dashboard would require the user to authenticate (to ensure only the server admin can see their server’s data). This can be done via Discord OAuth2 login. Upon login, the frontend gets a token or session, which it includes in API requests (or the backend issues a session cookie). The junior dev should use an existing library or example for Discord OAuth – once logged in, the backend can provide the list of servers and data. For initial development, this can be skipped or simplified (assuming a dev environment).
Tailwind Usage: Tailwind will be used to style components. Encourage the use of Tailwind utility classes for spacing, font sizing, colors, etc., rather than writing custom CSS. This keeps the styling quick and consistent. For example, a summary card might use classes like bg-white shadow p-4 rounded-lg mb-4 to give it a white background, drop shadow, padding, and rounded corners with a bottom margin.
Accessibility: Use proper HTML elements and attributes to ensure the dashboard is accessible. For instance, use <h1>, <h2> tags for section titles (“Daily Summary”, “Sentiment Trend”), use lists for lists of users, and add aria-labels to charts or interactive elements. This is good practice and helps all users.
Testing the UI: Although not the primary focus, basic testing of the UI can be done. React Testing Library can be used to ensure components render correctly given sample data. Also, test the API integration by mocking fetch responses. This will catch integration issues early and is a good learning exercise for a junior dev.
Displaying AI-Generated Insights
Clarity in Summaries: The AI-generated summaries should be presented with a clear label (e.g., “Daily Summary”) and possibly a short explanation or tooltip like “Generated by AI”. This transparency helps users trust the content by knowing its origin. Keep the summary text as is, but if it’s very long, consider showing the first few lines with a “Read more” expand option.
Handling Uncertainty: AI outputs might sometimes be slightly off-topic or generic. It’s good to design the UI to handle this gracefully. For example, if the summary is empty or seems incorrect, the UI could display a note: “Summary is unavailable or may be inaccurate for this period.” Providing a feedback mechanism (like a thumbs up/down button on the summary) could be useful for future improvement – though that may be beyond MVP, it’s worth leaving room for it.
Highlighting Key Points: If the summary contains multiple points (e.g., “Topic A was discussed. Also, Topic B came up.”), consider breaking them into bullet points for readability. The frontend can do simple parsing (maybe the summary model outputs sentences separated by newlines or special tokens that we can split on). This makes the content easier to scan.
Sentiment Insights: Alongside visual charts, provide a short textual interpretation. For example, “Overall sentiment was positive today, with most messages expressing enthusiasm.” This can be generated from the data but should be phrased consistently. The combination of text + visual ensures the insight is understood. If sentiment was mixed, the text might say “mixed or neutral”.
Historical Navigation: Allow the admin to view past summaries. A date picker or a list of past days (could be a sidebar or dropdown) enables looking at previous reports. This is a front-end feature that calls an API like /summary/{date}. It’s useful for context (yesterday vs today sentiment) and debugging (if something was flagged on a certain day). Make sure to label dates clearly and perhaps disable selecting dates with no data.
Real-Time Updates: While daily summaries are static once generated, the dashboard could also show some real-time info if desired – like “Messages so far today: 50” or “Current live sentiment: Positive”. This would involve more frequent API calls or WebSockets. If implemented, use caution to not overwhelm the API. A simple implementation is to refresh certain stats every 5-10 minutes. This isn’t critical, but something to keep in mind for making the dashboard feel live.
Overall, the front-end should serve as a convenient extension of the bot – not doing heavy processing itself, but pulling and displaying information in a way that’s easy to understand. By following these guidelines, a junior developer can create a functional and attractive dashboard that complements the Discord bot’s in-app reports.
Backend Structure Document
Architecture Overview
The backend consists of multiple components working together: the Discord bot service, the AI modules, the database, and an optional API service. The architecture is designed to separate concerns (Discord interaction vs data storage vs web serving) while allowing them to communicate effectively. The following diagram shows the main components and data (image)d_image】 System Architecture: The Discord Bot service (built with discord.py) connects to Discord servers to send and receive events. It stores messages and analysis results in a SQLite/PostgreSQL database for persistence. For NLP tasks, it interacts with the Gemma3 LLM via Ollama – sending chat data and receiving summaries or explanations. A FastAPI web service exposes REST endpoints to retrieve summaries and stats from the database. A React web dashboard (frontend) can call these endpoints to display insights. This modular design ensures the bot can function independently while data and insights are accessible through the API for the frontend.

Components and Responsibilities
Discord Bot (discord.py): This is the core of the system, running as an asynchronous process. It handles all Discord integration:
Event Handlers: on_ready (bot startup), on_message (message received) are key. On startup, it may initialize database connections and schedule daily tasks. On message events, it executes the tracking logic (store message, sentiment analysis).
Command Handlers: If using discord.py commands or the newer Discord slash commands (via discord.ext.commands or interactions), those are defined here. For example, a /summary now command handler would gather recent messages and reply with a summary.
Internal Scheduling: Using discord.ext.tasks, a background task is scheduled for daily summary ge (python - Discord.py Bot run function at specific time every day - Stack Overflow)78-L381】. This task runs at a specified time each day and calls the summarization routine for each server.
Data Access: The bot interacts with the database through an abstraction layer (could be direct SQL queries or via an ORM model). For instance, when a message comes in, it calls something like db.save_message(guild_id, channel_id, user_id, content, timestamp, sentiment) which encapsulates the DB operation.
Database (SQLite/PostgreSQL): The persistent store for all data. The schema could be:
Guilds table: guild_id (Discord ID, primary key), guild_name, maybe config fields (summary_channel_id, summary_time, etc.).
Channels table: channel_id, guild_id (FK), channel_name, is_tracked (boolean).
Users table: user_id, guild_id, username (this could be optional – we might not need a separate users table if we just log user IDs in messages, but it can be helpful for quick lookups of username or aggregating stats per user).
Messages table: id (PK), guild_id (FK), channel_id (FK), user_id, content, timestamp, sentiment_score (e.g., a float or small int). This stores every message. If storage is a concern, we could periodically prune old messages after summarization (or move them to an archive table).
Summaries table: id (PK), guild_id, date, summary_text, sentiment_summary, generated_at (timestamp). This keeps records of daily summaries for reference. It can store the raw text of the summary and maybe some summary stats (like word count or a JSON of additional info).
Errors/Logs table (optional): If we want to log error events or unusual things in the DB for later analysis by the AI, we could have a table for that (with columns: timestamp, guild_id, error_type, details).
Using an ORM, these would correspond to Python classes. For example, a Message class with fields and relationships to Guild and Channel.
AI Summarization Module: This is a part of the backend responsible for preparing data for the LLM and invoking it. It could be a Python module or class, e.g., Summarizer. When called (with a set of messages), it formats the prompt. If using Ollama’s API, it might use an HTTP client to send a request to http://localhost:11434/api/generate (if such exists) with the model name and prompt. If instead using subprocess, it might call ollama run gemma3:27b -p "<prompt>". This module then waits for the LLM’s response, captures the summary text, and returns it to the bot. This component may also include logic to post-process the summary (fix formatting, trim if too long) or to handle timeouts/errors from the LLM (e.g., if the model fails to generate output, handle that gracefully).
Sentiment Analysis Module: Another logic module, which can be simpler. If using a Hugging Face model, we might initialize a pipeline at startup: sentiment_pipeline = pipeline("sentiment-analysis"). Then for each message or batch of messages, we call this pipeline. The module could also manage using the VADER lexicon or any efficient method if using less ML-heavy approach (as seen in simi (GitHub - ajyuan/Monitori: A Discord sentiment analysis bot that encourages positivity and rewards server members for saying nice things :). Built using Node.js and Discord.js)87-L293】, VADER is a quick rule-based sentiment analyzer). The result is typically a label (POSITIVE/NEGATIVE) and a score. We may convert that into a numeric score for storing. This module provides functions like analyze_text(text) -> score.
FastAPI Application: Runs as a web server (could be on a different thread or process). It defines endpoints such as:
GET /servers – returns list of servers and maybe basic stats.
GET /servers/{guild_id}/summary/{date} – returns the summary text and sentiment info for that date. (Date could default to “latest” if not provided).
GET /servers/{guild_id}/stats – returns aggregated stats like message counts, sentiment averages, etc., for use in charts.
POST /servers/{guild_id}/config – accepts changes like which channels to track or summary time (this would update the DB and the bot would need to pick up the change, possibly by the API also updating some shared config or sending a signal).
The FastAPI app has access to the same database (either through direct connection or via an ORM session). To avoid conflict, if it’s a separate process, it simply connects to the same PostgreSQL or SQLite (SQLite might be tricky with multiple writers, so in multi-process, Postgres is better). If in the same process, it can share an async session with the bot (but one must be careful to avoid blocking the event loop). FastAPI also allows WebSocket endpoints, which could be used if we want real-time updates to the front-end (not required initially).
Task Scheduler: The scheduling of daily tasks can be done via discord.ext.tasks.loop as mentioned, or an external scheduler like APScheduler. In this design, we stick to the built-in discord.py loop for si (python - Discord.py Bot run function at specific time every day - Stack Overflow)78-L381】. The @tasks.loop decorator runs a function at the specified time or interval. That function will iterate through all guilds in the database (or all guilds the bot is in) and call the summarization routine for each. It’s important that this loop catches exceptions (so one server’s failure to generate summary doesn’t stop the others). After finishing all, it sleeps until the next day.
Error Handling & Logging: Part of the backend structure is a logging mechanism. We integrate Python’s logging library to log events to a file (e.g. bot.log). Each major action (message received, summary generated, etc.) can be logged for debugging. In case of errors, we log stack traces. There might be an on_error handler for discord.py that catches exceptions in event processing. That handler could feed the exception message to our AI for analysis (if we implement that) – effectively the AI could be used to parse error messages and give a human-friendly explanation, which we log or send to the d (Using LLMs to Analyze and Extract Insights from Device Logs [P] : r/MachineLearning)73-L276】.
Bot Startup & Shutdown: The bot’s main script will initialize the Discord client, set up the database (e.g., create tables if not exist, using something like SQLModel.metadata.creat ([Building and Launching Your Discord Bot: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Thomas Chaigneau | Medium](https://medium.com/@thomaschaigneau.ai/building-and-launching-your-discord-bot-a-step-by-step-guide-f803f7943d33#:~:text=the%20,tables%20are%20set%20up%20correctly))17-L225】), load any saved configurations (like which channels to track if not all), start the background tasks, and then run bot.run(TOKEN)`. On shutdown (or restart), ensure the tasks are cancelled and DB connections closed properly.
Database Schema (Detailed)
Using SQLAlchemy/SQLModel terms, a basic schema was outlined above. Here’s a more concrete example of tables (with some fields abbreviated for brevity):
Guild (guilds) – guild_id (Primary Key, str or int depending on Discord’s ID type, usually int64), name (str), summary_channel_id (nullable int), summary_time (time or int for hour), created_at (datetime).
Channel (channels) – channel_id (PK), guild_id (FK -> guilds), name, is_tracked (bool), created_at. This helps if we only want to log certain channels. The bot would populate this when it joins or on command (or lazily when a message from a new channel comes in, then decide default track or not).
User (users) – user_id (PK), guild_id (FK), username, joined_at (if we track when user joined the server), etc. Could also store cumulative stats like total_messages, but that might be better in a separate stats table or computed on the fly. We might not strictly need this table if we never display user-specific data outside of the Discord environment, but it can be useful for caching usernames or computing top user stats quickly with SQL.
Message (messages) – id (PK autoincrement), guild_id (FK), channel_id (FK), user_id (FK), content (text), timestamp (datetime), sentiment (float or smallint). This is the main log of messages. If content is very large (people posting walls of text), consider a text column type that can handle it (most SQL DBs text type can handle it). The sentiment field can be, for example, +1 for positive, -1 for negative, 0 for neutral, or a more granular score.
Summary (summaries) – id (PK), guild_id (FK), date (date), summary_text (text), sentiment_overall (float or varchar like 'Positive/Negative'), created_at (datetime). We fill this after generating a daily summary. This allows the dashboard to fetch historical summaries without re-computation.
(Potential) Activity (user_stats) – This table could store daily aggregates per user per guild: e.g., date, guild_id, user_id, message_count, avg_sentiment. This would be filled during summary generation (e.g., computing the stats for that day). This is not strictly required but if the dashboard wants to show a trend per user or allow queries like “who were top 5 users today,” it’s more efficient to compute once daily than on the fly for each query.
All tables should use foreign keys to maintain referential integrity, and we’d index keys like guild_id on the messages table to speed up retrieval of a day’s messages for a particular guild.
API Routes Design
If building the FastAPI backend, here are some proposed routes and their functionality (assuming a base path like /api for clarity):
GET /api/servers – Returns a JSON list of servers the bot is aware of (from Guilds table), possibly with basic info: {id, name, summary_channel_id, last_summary_date}.
GET /api/servers/{guild_id}/summary/latest – Returns the most recent summary for that guild. This will look up the Summaries table for that guild’s latest date. The response JSON might contain: date, summary_text, sentiment_overall, top_topics (if any structured), top_users.
GET /api/servers/{guild_id}/summary/{date} – Returns the summary for that specific date (if exists). Similar structure to above.
GET /api/servers/{guild_id}/stats/{date} – Returns detailed stats for that date: could include total messages, sentiment breakdown (counts or percentages), maybe a list of users with message counts and average sentiment. This helps populate charts.
GET /api/servers/{guild_id}/channels – Returns the list of channels and which are tracked (so the frontend can show a toggle UI for channel tracking).
POST /api/servers/{guild_id}/channels – Accepts a JSON body with channel_id and an action (track/untrack). This endpoint would update the Channel table and perhaps signal the running bot to update its in-memory list. (This could be done by having the bot periodically sync with DB or by using something like Redis pub/sub or a simpler approach: the API writes to DB and also writes to a file/flag that the bot reads).
POST /api/servers/{guild_id}/generate_summary – (Optional) Trigger generating a summary on-demand. This would call the summarization process for that guild immediately (perhaps for a specified range). It might be restricted or auth-protected because the summarization is resource heavy. In a simple design, the frontend might not call this, instead relying on scheduled runs.
Authentication: These routes should check that the requesting user has rights to the guild. This would typically be done via a token that maps to a Discord user, then checking against the Guilds table if that user is the owner or an authorized user for that guild. Implementation can use OAuth token introspection or a simple shared secret during development.
The API should return proper HTTP status codes and helpful error messages. For example, if a summary is not found for a date, return 404 with message “No summary available for that date.” If someone requests a server ID that the bot doesn’t know, 404 as well.
Task Scheduling and Execution
As mentioned, the daily summary task can be implemented with @tasks.loop in discord.py:
from discord.ext import tasks
from datetime import time, timedelta
import pytz

# Schedule at 23:59 in a specific timezone, for example
daily_time = time(hour=23, minute=59, tzinfo=pytz.UTC)  # or use server’s tz

@tasks.loop(time=daily_time)
async def daily_summary_task():
    for guild in bot.guilds:  # bot.guilds is list of Guild objects the bot is in
        await generate_and_send_summary(guild.id)
In the above pseudo-code, generate_and_send_summary(guild_id) would encompass retrieving messages from DB, calling the summarizer, and sending the message. This approach leverages discord.py’s internal loop ma (python - Discord.py Bot run function at specific time every day - Stack Overflow)73-L381】. If using FastAPI in the same process, one has to be careful that these loops run in the same event loop. If separate, each process can have its own scheduler (maybe the API doesn’t need one).
We should ensure that the task does not overlap with itself – discord.py tasks handle this by default (they won’t start a new loop if the previous iteration is still running, unless explicitly concurrent). If a summary takes long, it might delay the next day’s summary (which is probably fine if it’s just a few minutes). Logging at the start and end of each guild’s summary generation is useful to track performance.
Additionally, the scheduling might need to handle timezones if each server wants summary at their local midnight. A simple way is to store a summary_time per guild, and start a separate tasks.loop for each guild’s configured time. Discord.py allows dynamic creation of tasks loops, but that might be complex. Alternatively, one loop runs every, say, 5 minutes and checks “is it time to run any guild’s summary now?” – but that’s less precise. For MVP, one global time (e.g. UTC midnight) could be used which will generate summaries for all servers at once. This is simpler, and as long as the model and CPU can handle sequential processing, it’s acceptable.
Handling Concurrency and Integration
Because we have potentially three asynchronous parts (Discord bot, AI calls, FastAPI), careful architecture is needed:
If running in one process: You might integrate FastAPI by mounting it in the discord.py loop using something like Hypercorn or Uvicorn with loop.create_task(uvicorn.run(...)). This can get complicated. Another approach is to run FastAPI on a separate thread with an event loop of its own (using e.g. threading.Thread for the server). A junior-friendly approach might be: run two separate programs – one for the bot, one for the API – and let them communicate via the database. This decouples concerns and is easier to reason about (at cost of requiring two processes).
The database ensures that data is consistent between the bot and API. When the bot writes a summary to the DB, the API can immediately serve it. If the API allows toggling channel tracking, it updates the DB, but how to inform the bot? One method: the bot can periodically (every minute or so) sync its channel tracking settings from the DB, or the admin can also issue a Discord command to reload settings after using the dashboard. For initial simplicity, configuration might remain in Discord commands only, to avoid this cross-communication issue.
AI model integration: Since Gemma3:27B is heavy, we might run it as a separate service (which Ollama essentially does). The bot sends requests and gets responses. We need to ensure not to send multiple huge requests at once that could exhaust memory. Possibly queue summarization jobs if needed – but with daily frequency it’s okay. For error analysis, those requests would be smaller and on-demand.
Graceful Shutdown: If the bot process is stopping (e.g., for update), it should ideally finish any ongoing summary generation and not leave the process half-done. Using asyncio tasks with timeouts can prevent hanging on a model output indefinitely. If needed, cancel the LLM call if it exceeds some time.
In conclusion, the backend structure is a classic producer (Discord events) -> store -> process (AI) -> output pipeline, with a REST API layered for external consumption of results. The use of standard libraries and clear module separation will make it easier to maintain. Following this structure, a developer can pinpoint where to look if, say, “summaries aren’t updating” (check scheduler and summarizer), or “dashboard shows no data” (check API and DB). Each part can also be tested in isolation, which brings us to testing and error handling.
Testing & Error Handling
Testing Strategy
A combination of unit tests, integration tests, and manual testing will be used to ensure the system works correctly and robustly.
Unit Tests (Logic Testing): Focus on the smallest pieces of logic:
Sentiment Analysis Function: Feed known strings to the sentiment function. For example, "I love this!" should return a positive sentiment (score > 0 or label "POSITIVE"), whereas "I hate this!" should be (What Is Sentiment Analysis? | IBM)L14-L17】. Verify that neutral sentences are handled (e.g., "It is a day." might be neutral ~0). These tests ensure our sentiment model is integrated correctly.
Summarization Prompt Building: Test the function that prepares the prompt or input for the LLM. Given a sample list of messages, ensure it concatenates or formats them as expected (e.g., separated by newline and usernames, or however we design it). This doesn’t test the model’s output (which is hard to predict), but it tests that we don’t accidentally omit or mis-order messages.
Database CRUD Operations: If using an ORM or direct SQL functions, write tests for those. For instance, adding a message to the DB and then querying it should return the same content. Updating tracking settings in the DB should reflect when queried. These ensure the DB schema and code are aligned.
Utility Functions: Any other helper (like a function that calculates top N users from a list of Message objects) should have a unit test with a controlled input to check the output.
Use pytest’s fixtures to set up a temporary database (perhaps an in-memory SQLite) and tear it down after tests. This allows testing DB operations without affecting production data.
Integration Tests (System Simulation): These tests simulate higher-level scenarios:
Simulated Discord Events: Since we can’t easily have the real Discord environment in tests, we can call the bot’s event handlers directly. For example, create a fake Message object (discord.py allows constructing some objects or we can monkeypatch). Then call on_message(fake_message). After that, query the database to see if the message was logged. This tests the integration of event->DB. We might need to run the test within an event loop (pytest-asyncio can help with async tests).
Daily Summary Generation: Populate the database with a set of messages (simulate a day’s data), then call the summary generation function (perhaps refactored so we can call it outside of the actual scheduled task). Instead of calling the real LLM, in tests we can monkeypatch the summarizer to a dummy function that returns a fixed string (to make the test deterministic). Then check that the Summary table got an entry with that string, and maybe that the Discord send function was called (this can be captured by injecting a fake Discord channel object).
API Endpoint Tests: Using FastAPI’s TestClient, we can start the FastAPI app and call the endpoints. For example, use a temp database with known data, then do GET /api/servers/123/summary/2025-03-20 and verify the JSON matches the data we inserted. Test also error cases: requesting a summary for a date that doesn’t exist returns 404. Also test that the API only returns data for authorized requests (this might be harder without setting up OAuth in test, but we can simulate an auth by injecting a header or bypass auth for testing).
End-to-End Dry Run: In a controlled environment (perhaps not automated via pytest but manually), run the bot with a test Discord server. Send a few messages on that server, trigger the summary (maybe by adjusting the time or using a command), and observe the output. This manual test ensures the whole pipeline works in real conditions. This can also be done in staging before deploying to production.
Performance Testing: Not formal load testing, but we can write a test to insert, say, 1000 messages and see if summarization still completes in a reasonable time (with maybe a dummy summarizer to not actually spend time on AI). Also test memory usage via profiling if possible (ensuring the bot doesn’t leak memory when processing many messages).
Handling Errors and Exceptions
Despite careful design, errors will happen – be it due to Discord API issues, database problems, or AI model hiccups. The system will incorporate robust error handling:
Try/Except Blocks: Wrap critical sections (message processing, DB operations, API calls to LLM) in try/except. If an exception occurs:
Log the error with details (stack trace, and context like which guild or message caused it).
For Discord event handlers: use discord.py’s on_error handler or wrapping in try/except inside the event. Discord.py by default prints errors if an event handler raises; we override to capture that and prevent the whole bot from stopping.
In the daily summary loop, catch exceptions so one guild failing doesn’t break the loop for others. Perhaps surround each guild’s summary generation in a try/except and log if that guild failed, then continue with next guild.
Database Errors: If a DB transaction fails (e.g., DB locked or connection lost), the bot should retry a few times if possible. SQLite can be locked if two writes happen simultaneously; we can mitigate by using a short delay and retry. For Postgres, if connection is lost, attempt to reconnect. Ensure these errors are also logged. Use parameterized queries or ORM methods to avoid SQL injection issues (though in this context, data comes from Discord not from user-entered SQL).
AI Model Errors: The LLM might throw an error or timeout. We should implement a timeout for the summarization call – e.g., if no response in 60 seconds, abort that attempt. In such a case, the bot can fall back: maybe try a simpler summarization (like using an alternative model or just selecting the first X messages as a “summary”). Or it can send a message: “Summary generation failed for today, sorry!” to at least notify. Similarly, if sentiment model loading fails, perhaps default to a simpler method or skip sentiment for that run.
Discord API Exceptions: When sending messages or performing actions, Discord may raise errors (like insufficient permissions, or rate limit exceptions). Check the exceptions (discord.py has specific exception classes). For permission issues – log it and possibly notify the admin to fix bot permissions. For rate limits – discord.py handles minor rate limits internally by waiting, but if we ever hit a global rate limit, log it and back off. In summary posting, this is unlikely if it’s just one message a day.
Graceful Degradation: If one part of the system is down (e.g., the AI model is not running), the bot should still function partially. It could skip summaries but still log messages, or use an alternate summarization (perhaps a very naive summary like “X messages today, couldn’t generate detailed summary.”). Always prefer the bot staying online and providing whatever data it can, rather than going offline entirely.
AI-Assisted Debugging
A unique aspect is using an LLM to assist in debugging and error analysis:
Log Analysis: The system can include a tool or command for developers that takes the error logs and feeds them to the Gemma3 model to get an explanation. For instance, if a stack trace is logged, a dev could copy it and in a secure channel type a command like /explain_error [error_id], where error_id corresponds to a logged error entry. The bot would then retrieve that error’s details and prompt the LLM: “Here is an error log: [log]. Explain what might have caused this and how to fix it.” The model’s response could be posted for the dev. This uses the model’s strength in understanding text to save debugging time (e.g., it might recognize a KeyError and say “This error usually means a dictionary key was not found. It happened in function X, so check that the key exists before usage.”) – basically acting like a smart rubber duck (How to Create a Python SIEM System Using AI and LLMs for Log ...)5†L2-L7】.
Automated Error Reports: Optionally, the bot could automatically attempt to summarize any critical error in the logs and send it to the maintainer. For example, if the daily summary task crashes, the bot could DM the developer (if their ID is known or via an external alert) with something like: “An error occurred in Daily Summary: KeyError: 'content' in function generate_summary. Possible cause: a message had no content field. (This analysis is AI-generated.)”. This is advanced but could drastically reduce time to pinpoint issues.
Testing the AI on errors: As part of testing, we can supply some known error examples to the LLM and verify it produces useful explanations. For instance, simulate a division by zero error log and see if it identifies “division by zero” as the cause. This doesn’t have to be perfect, but is a cool use of the Gemma3 model’s capabilities in the development process itself.
Logging and Monitoring
Logging is the first line of defense in error handling:
Use a rotating file handler for logs so they don’t grow indefinitely. For example, keep logs for last 7 days.
Log key info for debugging: when daily summary starts and ends for each guild, how many messages were processed, any stats computed, etc. These can be INFO level logs that help trace the execution flow after the fact.
Separate log levels: INFO for routine operations, WARNING for non-critical issues (e.g., “Sentiment analysis failed for a message, skipping it”), ERROR for serious issues that might need attention (e.g., “Failed to post summary to Discord”).
Possibly log to console (stdout) in addition to file, which is useful if running in Docker (where one would check container logs).
For monitoring, aside from logs:
We could incorporate a health-check endpoint in FastAPI (like /api/health) that the frontend or a monitoring system pings to ensure the API is up. This could also check that the bot is currently connected (perhaps by the bot updating a heartbeat timestamp in the DB that the API reports).
Metrics like number of messages processed per day, average sentiment per day could be tracked over time to watch for anomalies (e.g., message count drops to 0 might mean the bot isn’t capturing events).
Graceful Shutdown and Restart
In error scenarios or when deploying updates, the system should shut down gracefully:
When the bot process receives a terminate signal, it should attempt to complete any ongoing summary generation if possible, or at least save state. Using try/finally around the main loop can ensure we call bot.logout() or similar.
The API can usually stop accepting new requests and shut down quickly, that’s simpler.
After an unexpected crash, having the bot restart (via something like a process manager) is important for a 24/7 service. We assume a deployment environment where the bot is restarted on failure. When starting, it should recover (since it reads everything from DB, any missed messages that happened during downtime won’t be captured, but the next summary will proceed with what it has).
By following these testing practices and error-handling strategies, we ensure the Discord bot system is robust and maintainable. We want the junior developers (and the users) to trust that the system not only works during ideal conditions but also handles the unexpected in a sensible way. The use of automated tests will catch bugs early during development, and the layered error handling (with some AI help) will make diagnosing issues in production muc (Using LLMs to Analyze and Extract Insights from Device Logs [P] : r/MachineLearning)73-L276】.
